## How to Become a Programmer

A programmer is generally tasked with producing a **solution to a problem** via a computer program, which can be reused as various particular instances of that problem arise. To accomplish this task, the programmer therefore must be able to **understand the problem**, derive an **appropriate solution**, and then be able to effectively **express that solution in a computer programming language**.

The first prerequisite to becoming a programmer is to develop a strong background in **problem solving** as is often required in fields such as mathematics and engineering. The ability to formally, concisely, and clearly state a problem and then derive its solution is a fundamental skill that precedes the process of any computer coding. The study of computer algorithms focuses on the generalized problem solving approaches often applicable in computer science. Techniques such as programming design patterns provide practical templates which often help frame solutions in an understandable, reusable manner. In general, there are many different classes of problems in computer science that require different techniques to solve effectively: having a strong repertoire of approaches aids in finding good solutions.

The second prerequisite to becoming a programmer is knowing a programming language with which to express a particular solution to a problem. A programming language is a tool, which practice will help form into expertise. Learning multiple languages can often be helpful as the process will demonstrate the particular strengths of different approaches to solving particular classes of problems.

In both these areas, **practice is essential**. Exposure to a wide variety of problems and tools to solve them will increase your understanding of the field as whole, to judge for yourself the relative merit of techniques in the field, as well as to discover unique, new approaches to addressing the problems of computer science. As with the practice of any new skill, do not be afraid to make mistakes, to redo earlier work, or to stumble along the way to expertise.

**Don't be afraid to make mistakes** because you will make them - constantly and for the rest of your career. Even the best programmers make mistakes regularly (if they try to say differently then they are either lying or deluded). Making mistakes is really part of the programming process. Someone said, to find a solution to a problem you must partly solve the problem. So you'll probably end up rewriting parts of your programs several times. Part of what distinguishes better programmers is their ability to catch at least some mistakes before they become a problem. Nobody can catch them all without help. Well, nobody can catch them all: there is no bug-free program.

Learn to work with others in a **team** environment. People have different strengths and weaknesses and a good team can bring together people whose strengths and weaknesses are complementary. The members of a team can teach each other. Most importantly, teams can tackle problems that would be too big for an individual. Beware, though, teams are not easy to lead and you can easily make a project a disaster by just gathering as many people as you can. If you want to work with a team, come with a solid design and a strong vision of what the project should look like when it's finished. If other members of the team suggest new ideas, take them with consideration but do not fall in the feature-greed pitfall, e.g. your project is never finished because the final goal grows beyond all proportions.
